# ZooKeeper's System Specification of TLA+

## Overview

ZooKeeper's system specification of TLA+ focuses on the implementation of the Zookeeper Atomic Broadcast(ZAB) consensus protocol (or, [ZAB1.0](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/ZOOKEEPER/Zab1.0)). 

As is shown by the informal description of [ZAB1.0](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/ZOOKEEPER/Zab1.0), the implementation of ZAB that used in ZooKeeper production differs a lot from its original design.

We make this system specification to grasp the core logic of the ZAB's implementation especially. 

The [sysetm specification](ZabWithFLEAndSYNC.tla) written in TLA+ is precise without ambiguity, and testable with existed tools like the TLC model checker. (We have done a certain scale of model checking to verify its correctness!) 

The system specification can serve as the super-doc supplementing detailed system documentation for the ZooKeeper developers. It can evolve incrementally without high cost as the system develops over time, continually ensuring correctness for both the design and the implementation.

We have also made a formal [specification](FastLeaderElection.tla) for Fast Leader Election in Zab since ZAB 1.0 depends on FLE to complete the election phase.

If you have any question or find any problem of the specification, please contact us.



## Quality Ensurance

The system specification serving as a super-doc is supposed to describe the core logic of implementation precisely.

Model checking is not sufficient to guarantee the quality of a system specification as there may still exist some critical gaps between the specification and the implementation.

We conduct conformance checking to deal with this problem. 



#### Conformance Checking

With the [Model Checking-driven Explorative Testing (MET)](https://github.com/Lingzhi-Ouyang/MET) framework, we can perform conformance checking in a low-cost way. 

Based on the instrumented ZooKeeper system, the test execution environment can intercept and release target events in designated orders. We can explore whether the traces generated by TLC can be reproduced in the manipulated system or not. Once the validation fails, there might exist some inconsistency between the written specification and the implemented code. Then, the specification should be corrected to further match the code with human efforts. After more and more rounds of conformance checking, the system specification can be of higher accuracy. 

We have executed conformance checking after completing system specification. We discover several divergences between specification and code. For example, the very first version of system specification assumes whenever the action *LeaderProcessRequest* is scheduled (simulating the logic of a leader processing a SetData request), the client session has already been established successfully. The main purpose of this design is to mitigate state space of the model. 

```TLA+
LeaderProcessRequest(i) == 
        \** Enabling conditions
        /\ CheckTransactionNum 
        /\ IsON(i)
        /\ IsLeader(i)
        /\ zabState[i] = BROADCAST
        \** Do something
        ... 
```

However, the client session creation is also regarded as a transaction in ZooKeeper, and should be committed by a quorum of servers. If not enough servers are ready to commit this transaction, the client session cannot be established successfully, and the following write request will not be processed. We find this divergence during conformance checking and fix it by adding extra enabling restrictions in the action *LeaderProcessRequest*. 

```TLA+
LeaderProcessRequest(i) == 
        \** Enabling conditions
        /\ CheckTransactionNum 
        /\ IsON(i)
        /\ IsLeader(i)
        /\ zabState[i] = BROADCAST
        \** The following condition is added to ensure that quorums of servers are ready to process transactions
        /\ LET inBroadcast == {s \in forwarding[i]: zabState[s] = BROADCAST}
           IN IsQuorum(inBroadcast)
        \** Do something
        ...
```

Through conformance checking, the system specification has been perfected a lot and got approved by the ZooKeeper committee. Both protocol specification and system specification are under review and about to be merged in the ZooKeeper repository.



## Feedbacks of Community

We submit a [PR](https://github.com/apache/zookeeper/pull/1690) of providing formal specification and verification for Zab-pre1.0 and Zab-1.0 ( corresponding to protocol specification and system specification, respectively ).

This PR aims at fulfilling the request of [write a TLA+ specification to verify Zab protocol](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ZOOKEEPER-3615) raised in 2019.

As the conversation on the [PR](https://github.com/apache/zookeeper/pull/1690) link desplays, the specifications have received a lot of warm discussions and positive feedbacks from ZooKeeper committee and community developers. 

These feedbacks guide us to continuously adjust and improve the specification to an appropriate abstraction level. 

Recently, we are told that our specification PR is expected to be reviewed and merged soon (https://lists.apache.org/thread/x622jkntmj81tg44n5lo4lvpx0b000d7). 

